# Equivalent Approaches to Dealing with Unobserved Heterogeneity in Cross-Lagged Panel Models?

A repository containing author's version of the manuscript and supplementary materials. 

# Description 

This article looks at panel regression models in structural equation modeling that combine static and dynamic components. 

It focuses on a comparison of the Autoregressive Latent Trajectory (ALT), Dynamic Panel Model (DPM), Latent Curve Model with Structured Residuals (LCM-SR) and Random Intercept Cross-Lagged Panel Model (RI-CLPM). 

It shows that the RI-CLPM and LCM-SR are equivalent to *constrained* versions of the DPM and ALT, respectively. 

This places potentially unrealistic assumptions on the initial conditions, i.e., the process that was occuring before the observation period began. 

Because of this, in situations in which the process under investigation is not both *stationary* and at *equilibrium*, the RI-CLPM and LCM-SR will return biased estimates of the autoregressive and cross-lagged parameters. This is shown analytically and using the example of cigarette smoking amongst adolescents. 

To use these models on data that violate the initial conditions assumptions, the individual effects must be allowed to covary with the initial residuals. This results in a kind of *predetermined* RI-CLPM or LCM-SR. 

# Contents

## article 

Both the original Rmarkdown file (`equivalent-approaches.Rmd`) and PDF version (`equivalent-approaches.pdf`) of the author's version of the manuscript along with the references (`r-references.bib`). 

## r-files 

R code used in the article for the empirical examples. 

- `examples-final.R`: all the `lavaan` models for the empirical examples

Data preparation R code. 

- `nlys-alc-smoke-weed-make-dataframe.R` and `nlys-monitoring-make-dataframe.R`: the `R` files generated by the NLS Investigator (https://www.nlsinfo.org/investigator/pages/search?s=NLSY97) to create objects (`monitor.Rda`, `alc-cig-mar.Rda`) out of the downloaded data
- `make-df-substances-monitoring-IMPORTANT.R`: combines the `monitor.Rda` and `alc-cig-mar.Rda` files into one object: `df.Rda`

Simulation code used in the article 

- `simulated-example.R`: creates simulated data consistent with a stationary process that approaches equilibrium. Makes the `ggplot`s shown in the article

# Contact 

For questions and comments, please email me at: henrik.andersen@soziologie.tu-chemnitz.de. 
